# Colossians 3:18-25


### Verse 18.
 "Wives, be subject." Now follow particular duties, as they are called, which depend on the calling of individuals. In handling these it were superfluous to take up many words, inasmuch as I have already stated in the Epistle to the Ephesians almost everything that was necessary. Here I shall only add briefly such things as are more particularly suited to an exposition of the passage before us.

He commands "wives" to be "subject". This is clear, but what follows is of doubtful signification — "as it is fit in the Lord." For some connect it thus — “Be subject in the Lord, as it is fit.” I, however, view it rather differently, — "As it is fit in the Lord", that is, according to the appointment of the Lord, so that he confirms the subjection of wives by the authority of God. He requires "love" on the part of "husbands," and "that they be not bitter", because there is a danger lest they should abuse their authority in the way of tyranny.

### Verse 20.
 "Children, obey your parents." He enjoins it upon "children" to obey their parents, without any exception. But what if parents should feel disposed to constrain them to anything that is unlawful; will they in that case, too, obey without any reservation? Now it were worse than unreasonable, that the, authority of men should prevail at the expense of neglecting God. I answer, that here, too, we must understand as implied what he expresses elsewhere, (Ephesians 6:1) — "in the Lord". But for what purpose does he employ a term of universality? I answer again, that it is to shew, that obedience must be rendered not merely to just commands, but also to such as are unreasonable. For many make themselves compliant with the wishes of their parents only where the command is not grievous or inconvenient. But, on the other hand, this one thing ought to be considered by children — that whoever may be their parents, they have been allotted to them by the providence of God, who by his appointment makes children subject to their parents.

 "In all things," therefore, that they may not refuse anything, however difficult or disagreeable — "in all things", that in things indifferent they may give deference to the station which their parents occupy — "in all things", that they may not put themselves on a footing of equality with their parents, in the way of questioning and debating, or disputing, it being always understood that conscience is not to be infringed upon. He prohibits parents from exercising an immoderate harshness, lest their children should be so disheartened as to be incapable of receiving any honorable training; for we see, from daily experience, the advantage of a liberal education.

### Verse 22.
  "Servants, be obedient." Anything that is stated here respecting "servants" requires no exposition, as it has been already expounded in commenting on Ephesians 6:1, with the exception of these two expressions, — "For we serve the Lord Christ"; and, "He that will act unjustly will receive the reward of his iniquity."

By the former statement he means, that service is done to men in such a way that Christ at the same time holds supremacy of dominion, and is the supreme master. Here, truly, is choice consolation for all that are under subjection, inasmuch as they are informed that, while they willingly serve their masters, their services are acceptable to Christ, as though they had been rendered to him. From this, also, Paul gathers, that they will "receive" from him "a reward", but it is the "reward of inheritance", by which he means that the very thing that is bestowed in reward of works is freely given to us by God, for "inheritance" comes from adoption.

In the second clause he again comforts "servants", by saying that, if they are oppressed by the unjust cruelty of their masters, God himself will take vengeance, and will not, on the ground that they are "servants," overlook the injuries inflicted upon them, inasmuch as there is "no respect of persons with him". For this consideration might diminish their courage, if they imagined that God had no regard for them, or no great regard, and that their miseries gave him no concern. Besides, it often happens that servants themselves endeavor to avenge injurious and cruel treatment. He obviates, accordingly, this evil, by admonishing them to wait patiently the judgment of God.

